README.md, before:

# BAT tech guide

This is the repo for the [Become a Teacher tech team guide](https://bat-tech-guide.london.cloudapps.digital).

## Developing on this project

To preview your new website locally, navigate to your project folder and run:

```sh
bundle exec middleman server
```

👉 See the generated website on `http://localhost:4567` in your browser. Any content changes you make to your website will be updated in real time.

To shut down the Middleman instance running on your machine, use `ctrl+C`.

If you make changes to the `config/tech-docs.yml` configuration file, you need to restart Middleman to see the changes.

## Build

To build the HTML pages from content in your `source` folder, run:

```
bundle exec middleman build`
```

Every time you run this command, the `build` folder gets generated from scratch. This means any changes to the `build` folder that are not part of the build command will get overwritten.

## Troubleshooting

Run `bundle update` to make sure you're using the most recent Ruby gem versions.

Run `bundle exec middleman build --verbose` to get detailed error messages to help with finding the problem.

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under [the MIT License][mit]. The documentation is [© Crown copyright][copyright] and available under the terms of the [Open Government 3.0][ogl] licence.

[mit]: LICENCE
[copyright]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/

Commit message:

Explain how main is deployed

README.md, after:

# BAT tech guide

This is the repo for the [Become a Teacher tech team guide](https://bat-tech-guide.london.cloudapps.digital).

## Developing on this project

To preview your new website locally, navigate to your project folder and run:

```sh
bundle exec middleman server
```

👉 See the generated website on `http://localhost:4567` in your browser. Any content changes you make to your website will be updated in real time.

To shut down the Middleman instance running on your machine, use `ctrl+C`.

If you make changes to the `config/tech-docs.yml` configuration file, you need to restart Middleman to see the changes.

## Build

To build the HTML pages from content in your `source` folder, run:

```
bundle exec middleman build`
```

Every time you run this command, the `build` folder gets generated from scratch. This means any changes to the `build` folder that are not part of the build command will get overwritten.

## Deployment

The site is deployed automatically to the GOV.UK PaaS whenever `main` branch is updated. 

## Troubleshooting

Run `bundle update` to make sure you're using the most recent Ruby gem versions.

Run `bundle exec middleman build --verbose` to get detailed error messages to help with finding the problem.

## Licence

Unless stated otherwise, the codebase is released under [the MIT License][mit]. The documentation is [© Crown copyright][copyright] and available under the terms of the [Open Government 3.0][ogl] licence.

[mit]: LICENCE
[copyright]: http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/re-using-public-sector-information/uk-government-licensing-framework/crown-copyright/
